src/content/bootnodes: add bootnodes page (#8958)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/bootnodes/index.md

---
title: Bootnodes
description: The basic information you need to understand bootnodes
lang: en
---

# Introduction to Ethereum Bootnodes {#bootnodes}

## What are bootnodes? {#what-are-bootnodes}

> When a new node joins the Ethereum network it needs to connect to nodes that are already on the network in order to discover new nodes. These entrypoints into the Ethereum network are called bootnodes. Clients usually have a list of bootnodes built in that are run by the Ethereum Foundation or the client teams themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new node joins the Ethereum network it needs to connect to nodes that are already on the network in order to discover new nodes. These entrypoints into the Ethereum network are called bootnodes. Clients usually have a list of bootnodes hardcoded into them. These bootnodes are typically run by the Ethereum Foundation's devops team or client teams themselves.
```

## Connect to a bootnode {#connect-to-bootnode}

> Most clients have a list of bootnodes build in, but you might want to connect to other bootnodes to connect by specifiying them when starting your client:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most clients have a list of bootnodes build in, but you might also want to run your own bootnode, or use one that is not part of the client's hardcoded list. In this case, you can specifiy them when starting your client, as follows (example is for Geth, please check your client's documentation):
```

```
geth --bootnodes "enode://<node ID>@<IP address>:<port>"
```

## Run a bootnode {#run-a-bootnode}

> Bootnodes are full nodes that are not behind a NAT. Every full node can act as a bootnode as long as it is publicly available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bootnodes are full nodes that are not behind a NAT ([Network Address Translation](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/network-address-translation-nat/)). Every full node can act as a bootnode as long as it is publicly available.
```

When you start up a node it should log your enode, which is a public identifier that others can use to connect to your node.

> The enode is usually regenerated on every restart, so make sure to look at your clients documentation on how to generate a persistent enode for your bootnode. 

Reviewer 2: nit: add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The enode is usually regenerated on every restart, so make sure to look at your client's documentation on how to generate a persistent enode for your bootnode. 
```
